This video is brought to you by Blinkus the first a hundred people to go to
blinkus.com/biographics will get one week to try it out for free.
You'll also get 20 point percent off the cost of full membership,
more on them in a bit,
You probably know the old saying some are born to greatness while others have
greatness thrust upon them. During the years we've been making these videos.
We've covered hundreds of men and women who fall into both categories.
We've even covered plenty of people for whom greatness meant doing something
consequential, but awful, your Stalins and your mouths.
What about those whose destiny isn't to be anywhere close to greatness.
Those who were born to while had mediocrity thrust upon them only for that
mediocrity to itself older history for Charles Cormo.
This wasn't an abstract question.
It was his very life born into the English upper classes.
KOMO had the misfortune of embarking on a military career just as England's
American colonies. As he exploded in revolt,
promoted above his head and shipped out to fight.
He wounds up being the red coats commands are at York town.
Whereas surrender ended the revolutionary war and insured Britain forever lost
her 13 colonies in today's video. We're examining the life of a mostly decent,
but a useless man,
a useless man who somehow still managed to change the world.
When Charles Cormo was born on December the 31st, 1738,
it was into a family that was spectacularly well connected.
His grandfather was brother-in-law of the great Robert WPA while his father
would soon be made both an Earl and VI counts.
The family also stood in good grace with the monarchy,
despite likely having Cornish Irish roots that corn Wallaces were famously loyal
to the British throne.
It was a trait that Charles would inherit and won that would land him in a lot
of trouble. But now though,
young Charles enjoyed a regulation childhood among the English upper classes,
attending Eaton with future Dukes and learning about military glory.
The boy evidently liked what he learns as a teenager.
His fascination with war was intense even by the standards of the time,
despite having a body shape,
we might charitably call unlike Chris Hemsworth and suffering skewed vision
from a sporting injury.
Kamal was determined to one day fight for king and country.
That day came sooner than he expected in August, 1756,
just as Charles was enrolling at Cambridge Frederick.
The great of pressure in did sate for the past two years.
America's British and French colonists said been fighting one another in the
French and Indian war.
Frederick's a great attack on a French ally in Europe was the opening of a whole
new theater of combat with Britain.
Now allied with Prussia in this increasingly global conflict,
Charles decided to ditch his studies and become the soldier that it always
dreamed of being from 1757 to 1761,
Charles corn Wallace toward Europe with the Prussian army fighting in some of
the biggest battles of his era. And he clearly made an impression by the end,
he was promoted to left tenant Colonel even before the fighting finished,
he was able to translate his military glory into a seat in Britain's house of
commons. Not that it needed for very long in June, 1762,
his father died and Charles inherited his album a year later as the seven years
war finally drew to a close. He took his dad's seat in the house of Lords,
stronger by word for stuffy conservatism.
The Lord's nonetheless had a handful of liberal ish members,
even in koala's day known as the rocking mites after their leader,
Lord Rockingham,
they managed to recruit the new L just as politics got very interesting being on
the winning side of the seven years, war had been great for Britain standing,
but it had been terrible for its finances since expelling the French from
America. It primarily benefited the 13 colonies.
It was decided the colonists could refill the King's coffers.
And so we come to the infamous stamp act attacks on all paper and printed
materials in the colonies. The stamp act was kind of like George III,
personally, slapping every American about the face with a bit of a freely glove.
It was also the stupidest thing that Ko Wallace had ever heard of in the Lord's
con Wallace became a passionate enemy of the stamp act believing it's unfair on
the Americans when Lord Rockingham became prime minister and repealed,
the act con Wallace was one of those who cheered the loudest,
but Rockingham also passed the declaratory act,
which basically said to the Americans, okay, finally, won't ask you now,
but we absolutely have the right to only five peers.
The ed against this new also dumb law among them was Charles KWA. Yet,
while he cared about all this politics,
wasn't Charles corn Wallace's life blood.
It wasn't what made him get out of bed in the morning in 1768,
he was ready to retire from the Lords and settle down with his new wife Jemima.
This would be the happiest period of his life.
Jemima was the daughter of a soldier, a far below Ko Wallace's class,
but it married her for love.
And the two soon settled into a blisful and boring domestic life
as the years passed. And the two became parents and grew fat.
It's just about possible to see how things could have turned out differently.
A world in which Charles KOMO was only ever an obscure happy nobody,
but unfortunately, Charles did not live in that world. In this world.
He was destined to not be forgotten, but to go down in infa
While Charles KWA was happily slipping into retirements,
the British governments was happily pouring gasoline onto the,
the stamp act dumpster fire just a year after the declar react,
the Townsend act that slapped duties on British exports to the colonies.
This has led to a boycot on British goods,
which had in turn led to British soldiers being sent to Boston culminating in
the Boston massacre.
When soldiers fired into a mob killing five in the wake of this parliament had
repealed the Townsend act and decided to stop the are being unfair taxes on the
Americans once. And for all, not, not really.
You are vaguely familiar with history that of course didn't happen. Instead,
you had the T act of 1773, which led to the Boston tea party.
And then the intolerable acts by which point the 13 colonies had basically
become a bit of a powder keg. Finally, on April the 18th, 1775,
British troops lit the match by marching out to sea weapons held in Concord,
Bon Rouge. They bumped into a waiting militia in Lexington.
Someone fired a shortens. The rest is history that you are familiar with. Okay,
so now we've recapped third grade American history class.
It's starting to check back in on corn Morris, despite having been par guy,
most likely to make love heart signs in America.
The moment the revolution broke out,
Ko Wallace defaulted back to his king and country mode.
Although his wife begged him not to,
he volunteered to fight and was promoted to major general and shipped out on
February the 12th, 1776 on may the third,
his ship made landfall in North Carolina.
At this point in the story Ko Wallace met his lifelong nemesis, sir,
Henry Clinton,
the man who would eventually had all the British forces in the colonies.
Clinton was a sensitive, moody, envious, incompetent,
entitled scrub of commander from almost the moment they met Clinton and corn
Wallace regarded one another with a mutual LOA thing,
a LOA thing that would eventually deteriorate into outright hostility.
But in those early days,
the British could ill pretends that this was just teething problems.
As corn Wallace was sent north to reinforce the William, how in New York,
it even looks like the war might be over before it properly began that summer
corn Wallace commanded the reserve troops in the battle of long island,
a cataclysmic defeat that saw George Washington lose New York city to the
British. Although William,
how let the American general slip through his fingers Kowa certain they'd catch
him soon.
Unfortunately it quickly became clear that slipping through fingers was
something Washington was rather good at the next six months of koala's life
reads like the synopsis for a rejected road rhino cartoon,
in which Wiley coyote briefly commands a major part of the British army.
There was the battle of Fort Lee in November,
which ended with koalas forced to chase the slippery Washington all over the
state.
Then there was corn Wallace's inexplicable decision to let Washington go after
finally capturing up with him a moment that may have cost the British the war.
Finally, there was what happened at Trenton on January the second,
1777 after marching a whole day to catch Washington corn Wallace allowed his men
to sleep rather than immediately fought a Cree can do battle stupidly.
He forgot to post look out.
So Washington simply waited until nightfall and then road runner away. Again,
leaving Ko Wallace's reputation to plunge wi coyote like into a bottomless pit.
When Clintons got the news of this BL he remarked,
it was the most consummate ignorance I ever heard of in any officer above a
corporal as all soon to see though Clintons was himself, no slouch at I,
and Kawas also did at least have one thing going for him throughout all the wars
that ever been involved with thel would do his best to make sure his man were
well fed paid on time and not made to suffer.
It's here that we see one of these sad contradictions of kas's life.
Up to a certain point. He was a competent man with a humane streak,
rare for his class. Had he been a bit less privileged?
He would've made a fine logistics commander or lower ranking officer,
but this was the 18th century in era, in British history.
When background was valued above ability,
poor Charles Gowa was gonna keep failing upwards until it killed him.
And as you know, perhaps Al Kowa might have failed a little less.
If he had quick and easy access to the greatest wisdom of his time,
he didn't have blinks because it was the 18th century and books were still being
written with feathers back then. But you, you have no excuse. Look,
if you are like me, you've got plans to read lots of new books this year,
because well,
you want to enter that sweet bank of knowledge that you keep in your big rain.
Unfortunately, reading takes time and energy and detention,
all things that we're all lacking. Fortunately though, I have Blinkus.
This is an app that offers easily digestible,
15 minute summaries of the best non-fiction books.
There's more than 3000 of them. You can either read or listen. Personally,
I listen about 90% of the time, just like a podcast.
It's easier to fit into my day. That way,
while mindless things like going to work or cleaning the kitchen or folding the
laundry, that sort of stuff.
14 million active users are currently using blinkers to get the best insights
and need to know info from thousands of books from self-help to business,
to health, whatever you're into it's on there.
Before example on my blinkers list for 2021,
I have how luck happens by Janice Kaplan and Barnaby marsh.
It's a whole book on how to create luck for yourself,
distill down into a 13 minute package.
So if you are interested in learning big ideas in small packages,
head to blinkers.com/biographics where the first hundred people will get one
week to try it out for free.
You'll also get 25% off if you want the full membership and let's get back to Ko
Wallace
Comic as the images of con Wallace, as some kind of dufus cartoon coyote,
we don't want you to go away thinking he was completely useless.
The key takeaway is that he was average an average guy in a position that
required someone well above average,
but even the mediocre have occasional moments of greatness.
Kowas came at the battle of Brandy wine.
Brandy wine is notorious today as Washington's biggest screwup,
but from the British perspective,
it was a triumph taking place on September the 11th, 1777.
It saw William how and Kowas launch a dual attack on Washington troops under the
cover of fog. Assuming how's division was the entire British force.
Washington left his right flank, clear,
open only for Kawas to come crashing into it.
The continental army suffered over 1,100 casualties compared to just 600 for the
British, although Washington, again, rode runner away.
He lost all of his artillery pieces and Philadelphia,
which now lay wide open for Kawas. The sneak attack was a huge personal victory.
He was even allowed time off that Christmas to go were home and see his wife.
We can only hope he enjoyed it because that Christmas would be the last normal
one that Charles ever spent with his family.
The following winter Jemima was taken ill. She died on February the 16th, 1779.
Thanks to emergency leave. Cole Wallace made it home just in time to see her,
but with the war still raging, he had no time to mourn.
Instead he had to pack back up and return to his domestic life in England,
no longer something to look forward to just a happy memory.
One of HAPPI at times, back in the colonies,
the war was moving inexorably against the British,
the French and Spanish were now involved.
The Americans had refused to surrender after Philadelphia fell.
And Henry Clintons was now overall British commander with predictably credit
results. So koalas decided to change tack in May, 1780.
He headed into South Carolina, the head of a vast fighting force,
determined to open a new front Charlestown fell quickly as did other keys,
strategic points before long koalas had effectively taken control of the entire
state.
When general gates attempted to retake the town of Camden for the Continentals,
Kamal even managed to win another great victory killing or capturing nearly 2000
Americans while losing only 300 of his own men come full of 1780 Kamal was
secure in South Carolina. Had he been his dream to rule the state as a warlord?
It would've been pretty happy, but of course that hadn't been koala's gold.
He wanted to take North Carolina too,
then March into Virginia and link up with Clinton army like so many dreams.
It would prove to be beyond Charles corn Wallace's reach.
North Carolina was not South Carolina.
The mini civil war between Patriots and loyalists was more bitter here.
The terrain less friendly in January, 1781,
the battle of pens saw many of corn's best soldiers killed or captured.
Two months later,
Kawa squared off against an Nathaniel green at the battle of Gilford courthouse
and managed to rack our technical victory that costs so many of his remaining
soldiers that you might as well call it at a defeat by now,
the great victory at Brandy wine must have seemed like very long ago.
Even the battle of Camden was three quarters of a year past still Kawas gamely
pushed on marching up into Virginia, despite North Carolina,
not yet being pacified in may of 1781,
his exhausted men finally reached the James river.
At which point they received the fateful order.
A message from Clinton came demanding, Ko Wallace,
establish a fortified base at either Williamsburg or Yorktown.
As far as KOMO was concerned,
this was like Clinton asking him to choose between a kicking,
the nuts and erectile inserted cactus.
Neither was particularly pleasant to contemplate,
but orders were orders with what we can only imagine was a pain sigh.
The Earl chose the kick in the nuts that was Yorktown.
All did poor Charles Kawa know it,
but it soon be wishing had chosen the prickly comforting cactus in Williamsberg.
Instead,
The moment Kowas settled in Yorktown,
the revolutionary war was basically over the French and most of the Americans
immediately realized the British was sitting ducks.
Although Washington initially ignored it as a side show,
he eventually realized its significance.
The only person who never figured it out was he Tinson in SCO New York.
Clinton was certain Washington was going to attack him so certain that when he
received a pathetic plea from Cornwell begging for more troops, he ignored it.
But Washington was already making plans to head south for the final battle.
On September the 28th,
the combined American French force began its assault on Yorktown.
As the siege trenches with Duggan's. The artillery began Cornwell that tight,
barely bothering to give orders.
It's possibly thought Clintons was coming to rescue him more.
He may have just realized how hopeless his position was on October the 14th.
The first assault began in his last act of competence.
Komal began faring his men to safety across the James river.
He got a thousand of them over before a storm blew up and ended impossible
escape cut off. There was nothing to do,
but wait for the end at 11:00 AM on October the 19th, 1781,
the British surrendered Yorktown. It was, uh,
frankly pathetic ends as the red coats marched out.
They acknowledged the French battalions, but ignored.
The American troops Kas refused to meet Washington for the formal surrender.
Instead sending an assistance. It was a cheap last minute snub,
but it didn't change the fact that the man he was snobbing had just handed Ko
Wallace's Yorktown ended the revolutionary war.
Thanks to a combination of Clinton's poor leadership and Ko Wallace's painfully
mediocre performance. The British were knocked out of the fight.
Of course the winds had been blowing in that direction for a very long time.
It's not like Kom Wallace was single handedly responsible for the British losing
the war, but he also didn't do much to help them win.
Had he been just a bit more talented, a bit more daring, a bit more? Well,
anything really well over six years of fighting that could have really added up
a few more Brandy wines here. Another Camden there,
and the history of America might look very different despite his major role in
losing the 13 colonies though,
koalas didn't return to Britain under a cloud of shame.
The view in London was that he was a good loyal soldier. And more importantly,
a gentleman, one who'd been put in an impossible position.
All of which is why within seven months of the disaster at Yorktown,
Charles kals was offered mil tree control of British India. I know, right?
This guy's literally just proven himself to be super UN excellent at this.
And here's the British establishment being all like, yeah,
you wanna try something even bigger? I mean, why not?
At least Ko Wallace himself had the brains to say no something he kept saying
for four whole years,
you can't have people falling upwards without the complicity of everyone else
though. In February of 1786, after years of controlling by prime minister pit,
the younger Kamal finally agreed.
He had only one request still smarting about Clinton's dumb orders,
Kamal demanded.
He be given total control of the subcontinent and Pitre so rather than retiring
into obscurity, Kamal sailed off for India.
So would he go any better than America did? What do you think
The India Charles Kowa arrived in was undergoing a seismic change in its
relationship with Britain until recently the east India company had almost free
reign over its territories. It was in 1784 that put the younger,
made the company former subservient to the crown as such British rule was driven
with corruption and beset by local waring Saltan and it was Kamal's job to
sort it all out.
His success would be qualified to say the least for Kamal corruption was
synonymous with natives.
So he decided to kick them all out of the colonial administration,
declaring every native of Hindustan.
I really believe EVAs corrupt kamalas enacted laws that effectively created an
all white governing class up until recently India had been a colonial
enterprise, but one in which Indians could at least attain important positions,
kamalas changed all of that.
A new glass ceiling stopped locals rising above the most minor roles in the
civil service while Indian police units were brought under British control.
Meanwhile, Kamal castigate,
any white officer who he deemed at formal connections with the worst black
people in Bengal. On the flip side,
he did at least try to promote the learning of native languages among British
officials, but compared to everything else that fairly faint silver lining.
There's also the matter of the third Anglo micaw war.
Unlike the American revolutionary war.
This war with the deep Salton of Mya ended in a commons victory in 1790,
the Salton started raid around the edges of British territory.
Kamas personally took control of the response and by April of 1791,
he had taken, I saw city of Bangalore,
but the war dragged on another year in part because koalas refused to trust
Britain's Indian allies leading to an unnecessary prolonging of the fighting.
When he finally did make peace in February of 1792,
it was with a treaty seemingly calculated to please. Absolutely nobody.
The Salton was upset because he had toed half his territory while London was
unhappy. Koalas hadn't held out for the whole lot. Still at least defeating.
Tepo took some of the stench of failure that was left over from Yorktown.
And Koal was certain that this wasn't gonna be his last war in February of 1793,
France. Then in the grip of revolution,
declared war on Britain with his term expiring and certain that'd been needed to
prepare England against a French invasion Kowas and home stopping only to annex
French pond cherry on the way. But although he was made head of the home front,
Charles wouldn't make his final mark on history fighting the French. Well,
not exactly. Instead,
he was destined to spend one last frustrating chapter of his life,
trying to pacify Ireland at the time,
Ireland was in a personal union with Britain, but not a political one.
They had the same king, but were separate countries sort of like how today,
Canada and the UK both have Elizabeth the second as the head of state,
but the Canadians,
fortunately don't have to have Boris Johnson as prime minister. However,
the islands of the 1790s had only just gained autonomy from Britain and no one
was adjusting well to the new state of affairs.
The Catholics who made up about 90% of the population wanted to go further and
Aishia French star Republic,
the Protestant minority who were 10% of the population, but held all the power,
wanted to hug closer to Britain and also just kill as many Catholics as
possible. When this erupted into the United Irishman rebellion in May, 1798,
London freaks out that the French would help their fellow Catholics and
establish a foothold on Britain's doorstep. The solution.
Well that was to send Charles Kawas to quell rebellious Irish. I mean,
what could possibly go wrong
In the ends Kamal's career fighting Irish rebels ended before it even started.
He landed in Dublin on June the 21st, 1798,
only for the rebels to be effectively knocked out of the war before it even
finished unloading,
all it was left to do from a military perspective was to defeat this more French
force that landed in August. But while the war was easily won,
the piece would be a nightmare.
KA Wallace's arena and island basically boiled down to well go and sort out this
annoying islands once and for all old chap. However,
that was easier said than done.
Although London had likely envisioned con Wallace using his broad powers to kick
a few Catholics in the testicles.
The Earl soon came to believe that the rebellious Catholics weren't actually the
problem. It was the Protestant rulers who were tearing Ireland apart were,
is Catholics in the vast majority.
The only way the Protestants could have any importance was by locking their
countrymen outta power and doing that required,
convincing themselves that the Catholic Irish was subhuman.
Komal was a Gast at leading Protestants, celebrating the murder of priests.
He grew to blame the blood thirsty loyalists for the whole sorry, war,
and even began trying to build personal links with the Catholic communities to
sort the mess out. Unfortunately, as chosen method would be very controversial,
not long after defeating the French expeditionary force Ko Wallace had made
friends with the Zen acting secretary of Ireland via castle Ray and ultimate
cast. Ray was the Island's leading proponent of reconciliation,
but did convinced himself that dragging islands into union with great Britain
was the only route to Catholic emancipation.
Now he managed to convince koalas of this two.
The trouble was a truly independent Ireland with equal rights would be a
Catholic Basian in Northern Europe. One, the French would no doubt ally with,
but to leave things as they are risk and Ireland ruled by Protestant tyrants who
repeatedly triggered civil wars and then demanded London, protect them. No,
the only future on Wallace could see was one where Ireland joins with great
Britain and Catholics were emancipated and protected by the benevolent majesty
of George II.
As any American who still remembered the stamp act would tell you this was never
going to work. Nonetheless,
Kowa and castle rate began a determined push to make the union happen.
It was a grueling two years. First,
they had to convince the Protestants who feared their own power being curtailed
and demanded massive bribes to vote it through seconds.
They had to convince the Catholics that this would be a new,
brighter chapter in their history and not just an excuse for London to, oh,
I don't know, brutally exacerbate,
a potato famines several decades down the line, killing millions. Finally,
they had to convince the British cabinet, the Ty Catholic emancipation.
So the act of union was both fair. And just to come is surprised.
They succeeded the cabinet was all like, sure,
we'll oppress them a bit less afterwards.
But then the union actually got voted through and the cabinet were all like,
ha just joking.
Let's oppress the out of them on January the first 1801 Ireland and great
Britain formally joined into a single state that same month,
king Georgia third declared.
There would never be any relief for increased rights for Catholics shortly after
ill exhausted and miserable. Charles KWA resigned privately.
He raged against the mule headed stupidity that would allow Britain to persevere
in the old system of prescription and exclusion in Ireland, but publicly well,
KA Wallace was still all about king and country.
Remember he accepted the settlements and then he packed his bags and returns
home. And that was pretty much it for the Earl.
Although he would play a role negotiating piece with Napoleon after the war of
the second coalition in 1802,
the wind seems to have been sucked out of his sail by the island debacle.
He went back into retirement,
perhaps determined to enjoy the choir life that he and his wife had briefly
known all those years earlier. But in this era, even failure and retirement,
couldn't stop the crown from forcing you into service in July, 1805,
corn Wallace was ordered to return to India. He didn't want to go,
but he felt he couldn't refuse. And sadly it was the wrong choice.
Not long after landing Charles Kawa contracted tropical fever.
He died on October the fifth thousands of kilometers from the country that he
had served so beautifully today.
The most striking thing about KA Wallace's life is how much of it he spent in
over his head in America. He was fighting a war.
He didn't really believe in while totally outwitted in India.
He was tasked with solving intricate problems using only the and TA of racial
apartheid and in Irelands. Well,
let's just say he was too trusting of his own king. It's not to come.
Wallace's detriment that we bring these up.
They are problems that would've befuddled someone with 10 times the talent that
that's sort of the point. Charles KA Wallace was not a talented man.
He was mostly mediocre with occasional flashes of man or brilliance that were
too few and too far between had,
he just stayed in retirement with Jeremiah in 1775.
He would've been completely forgotten by history,
but how much happier his life could have been?
How different the faiths of millions, the story of Charles K.
Wallace is both the tale of a moderate decent man who failed upwards and a
damning indictment of his time. A time when,
who your parents were mattered more than your capabilities con Wallis may have
had these soldiers life had always dreamed of, but as his story shows,
it sometimes may better when our dreams don't come true.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up bottom below.
Don't forget to subscribe and thank you for watching.